# ads501_ds_foundations
ADS-501 Foundations of Data Science and Data Ethics Final Project

## Title
Consultancy Project with LearnPlatform (LP): Development of analytics models to assess distance learning and effects from the COVID-19 pandemic

## Problem Area
The COVID-19 pandemic has had serious and long-lasting impacts on all aspects of life in the United States. The virus’ potential to cause wide-spread hospitalization and death, along with how quickly it moved across the country starting in early 2020, resulted in federal, state, and local governments creating policies mandating restrictions on how and where people could congregate. Though these measures were done to limit the health effects and contagion rate, they had other social ramifications, which included closure of service industry businesses like restaurants and an unprecedented closure of public and private schools. According to a survey performed by the United States Census Bureau (2020), 93% of people who self-reported as having school-aged children in their house also reported that those children relied on “distance learning” in some capacity. For many schools and districts, this meant putting a great deal of effort into pivoting to online or digital resources as a way of continuing to reach students and meet their learning needs. As much as these efforts were critical in attempts to minimize the negative impacts from such a substantial shift in learning environments, there was also a potential to widen the digital gaps between children of differing socio-economic backgrounds. Referring again to the Census Bureau’s survey, whether or not the distance learning was online or paper-based was dependent on household income. Those households with income under $100K were far less likely to use digital resources than those whose income was above. Moreover, in terms of general education access, the schools closing created a potential for long-term whole-sale reductions in achievement of learning outcomes.\
The main business problem areas are focused on identifying: The nature of online engagement in relation to several key factors, including district demographics, access to reliable internet, and government policy decisions; how engagement has been impacted by the pandemic, and whether some groups have been hit harder than others; and whether certain measures can improve online engagement for all students, but also more specifically for groups identified as facing serious and significant gaps in outcomes. As LP’s primary business focus is on facilitating the use of digital and online learning tools for education organizations, they both have a key stake in providing government agencies with information to improve digital learning engagement and outcomes, but are also uniquely poised to quickly develop additional resources and capabilities to add to their “edtech effectiveness system” (EES) in order to guide those policy makers on making informed, evidence-based decisions about how better to serve the needs of all students (LearnPlatform, n.d., “Districts” webpage). See the Business Objectives section for more details.\
Given the nature of LP’s business model, as well as their strong placement in the market, there is a general acknowledgment and acceptance of digital techniques to strengthen business processes and increase service capabilities; this includes seeing the value of investing in data mining, machine learning, and predictive analytics. They are in fact currently working towards the creation of a new Data Science Department within LP, but given that they are only in the planning stages they still require input and expertise from an outside organization. All of this together means the company understands the potential value of this project, but currently just lacks the full knowledgebase to execute it on their own. As a result, the project itself is still in the middle of the planning process, though they did have a solid formulation of the business problem by the time CarR2 was retained.\
*Note*: The data science consultting company is not real, but all details and concepts are original.

## Business Objectives
From a business standpoint, the aim is to provide more targeted services that elucidate gaps in online engagement caused by the pandemic, along with being able to predict whether certain district or state-level policy and practice changes can mitigate or decrease those gaps. The new services will be incorporated into LP’s existing EES, which is already specifically “used by districts and states to continuously improve the safety, equity, and effectiveness of their educational technology” (Kaggle, n.d., “Overview” section). As the pandemic and its impacts may continue into the foreseeable future, it is seen as critical by LP—whose central mission is to provide critical digital learning resources to educators to best serve students—to contribute to the activities that increase understanding of digital learning capacity and shortfalls.\
In consultation with LP’s Product Division Research Team and Marketing Division Market Research Team, the CarR2 DST has outlined several business questions that will serve as the basis for expanded services in the LP portfolio.\
Firstly, in order to know where to best utilize existing efforts to maximize gains, the following business questions related to descriptive analytics need to be addressed:
1.	What are the measured characteristics of online and digital learning in 2020?
2.	How does access to distance learning differ across the United States, focusing on the district and state levels?
3.	What differences can be seen in terms of socio-economic status? What differences can be identified based on race/ethnicity and income level? What general differences can be seen across localities or between districts?
4.	What measurable impact has the COVID-19 pandemic had on distance learning and specifically digital learning? Have the affects been different for students of differing socio-economic status?
Secondly, predictive analytics can used to examine the following business problems:
5.	Which student populations are at risk of having low levels of online engagement?
6.	Do governmental/public policy changes or state interventions change engagement in online learning? What about specifically for those groups already at a digital disadvantage?

Expected benefits from this project will include:
1.	First implementation of robust data science and predictive analytics functionalities to the existing EES.
2.	Utilization of specific predictive models focused on issues fundamental to increasing digital learning access and engagement.
3.	A reduction in online engagement gaps among geographically and socio-economically diverse student populations.
4.	Strengthening of existing relationships with customers, as well as an increase of the overall customer base.

